When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly be
celebrating his eleventy-first birthday with a party of special magnificence,
there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.  Bilbo was very rich and very
peculiar, and had been the wonder of the Shire for sixty years, ever since his
remarkable disappearance and unexpected return.  The riches he had brought back
from his travels had now become a local legend, and it was popularly believed,
whatever the old folk might say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels
stuffed with treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also his
prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it seemed to have little
effect on Mr.  Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At
ninety-nine they began to call him well-preserved, but unchanged would have
been nearer the mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought this
was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should possess
(apparently) perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.  ‘It
will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and trouble will come
of it!’ But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good
fortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course,
the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among the hobbits of
poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until some of his
younger cousins began to grow up.  The eldest of these, and Bilbo’s favourite,
was young Frodo Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his
heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of the
Sackville-Bagginses were finally dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the
same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You had better come and live here, Frodo my
lad,’ said Bilbo one day; ‘and then we can celebrate our birthday-parties
comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was still in his tweens, as the
hobbits called the irresponsible twenties between childhood and coming of age
at thirty-three.  Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given
very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood
that something quite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was
going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious number and a very respectable
age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); and Frodo was
going to be thirty-three, 33) an important number: the date of his ‘coming of
age’.  Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming
event travelled all over the Shire.  The history and character of Mr. Bilbo
Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk
suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.  No one had a more
attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He held
forth at The Ivy Bush, a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke with some
authority, for he had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had
helped old Holman in the same job before that. Now that he was himself growing
old and stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his youngest son,
Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very friendly terms with Bilbo and
Frodo. They lived on the Hill itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag
End.  ‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve always said,’
the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to him,
calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and consulting him constantly upon the growing of
vegetables - in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer was
recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood (including
himself).  ‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old Noakes of
Bywater. ‘Baggins is his name, but he’s more than half a Brandybuck, they say.
It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there
in Buckland, where folks are so queer.’ ‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in
Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrong
side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. That’s a dark bad
place, if half the tales be true.’ ‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not
that the Brandybucks of Buck-land live in the Old Forest; but they’re a queer
breed, seemingly.  They fool about with boats on that big river - and that
isn’t natural. Small wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as it
may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much
like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all his father was a Baggins. A
decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell
of him, till he was drownded.’ ‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard
this and other darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for
family history, and they were ready to hear it again. ‘Well, so they say,’ said
the Gaffer. ‘You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She
was our Mr.  Bilbo’s first cousin on the mother’s side (her mother being the
youngest of the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So
Mr. Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the
saying is, if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with his
father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him
being partial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. ‘ ‘I’ve heard they went
on the water after dinner in the moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was
Drogo’s weight as sunk the boat.’ ‘And I heard she pushed him in, and he pulled
her in after him,’ said Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller.  ‘You shouldn’t listen
to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the Gaffer, who did not much like the miller.
‘There isn’t no call to go talking of pushing and pulling.  Boats are quite
tricky enough for those that sit still without looking further for the cause of
trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo left an orphan and stranded, as you
might say, among those queer Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy
Hall. A regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer
than a couple of hundred relations in the place. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder
deed than when he brought the lad back to live among decent folk.  ‘But I
reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They thought they
were going to get Bag End, that time when he went off and was thought to be
dead. And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes on living and
living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly he produces an
heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t
never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’ ‘There’s a tidy
bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,’ said a stranger, a visitor on
business from Michel Delving in the Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is
full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by what I’ve
heard. ‘ ‘Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered the Gaffer. I
know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems no
lack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back,
a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I’d not long come prentice to
old Holman (him being my dad’s cousin), but he had me up at Bag End helping him
to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale
was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with a pony and
some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don’t doubt they were mostly
full of treasure he had picked up in foreign parts, where there be mountains of
gold, they say; but there wasn’t enough to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam will
know more about that. He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the
old days he is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned
him his letters - meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will come of
it.  ‘Elves and Dragons’ I says to him. ‘Cabbages and potatoes are better for
me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters, or
you’ll land in trouble too big for you,’ I says to him. And I might say it to
others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.  But the Gaffer
did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo’s wealth was now too firmly
fixed in the minds of the younger generation of hobbits.  ‘Ah, but he has
likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,’ argued the miller,
voicing common opinion. ‘He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish
folk that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror,
Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer
place, and its folk are queerer.’ ‘And you can say what you like, about what
you know no more of than you do of boating, Mr.  Sandyman,’ retorted the
Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. If that’s being queer, then
we could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not far away
that wouldn’t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with
golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that
everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s going to be presents,
mark you, presents for all - this very month as is.’ That very month was
September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or two later a rumour (probably
started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were going to be
fireworks - fireworks, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for
nigh on a century, not indeed since the Old Took died.  Days passed and The Day
drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden with odd-looking packages rolled into
Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits
peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. It was driven by outlandish folk,
singing strange songs: dwarves with long beards and deep hoods. A few of them
remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a cart came in
through Bywater from the direction of the Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight.
An old man was driving it all alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long
grey cloak, and a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows
that stuck out beyond the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the
cart all through Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks,
as they rightly guessed. At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload:
there were great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled
with a large red G  and the elf-rune, .  That was Gandalf’s mark, of course,
and the old man was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly
to his skill with fires, smokes, and lights. His real business was far more
difficult and dangerous, but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he
was just one of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement of the
hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the old man smiled. They knew
him by sight, though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never
stopped long; but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen
one of his firework displays
- they now belonged to the legendary past.  When the old man, helped by Bilbo
  and some dwarves, had finished unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but
not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the
onlookers.  ‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when the time
comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The young
hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off, feeling that
the day of the party would never come.  Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were
sitting at the open window of a small room looking out west on to the garden.
The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden:
snap-dragons and sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls
and peeping in at the round windows.  ‘How bright your garden looks!’ said
Gandalf.  ‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear
old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’ ‘You mean to go on with your plan
then?’ ‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t changed it.’ ‘Very
well. It is no good saying any more.  Stick to your plan - your whole plan,
mind - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have my little
joke.’ ‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head.  ‘We shall
see,’ said Bilbo.  The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more
carts. There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing locally’, but that
very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision,
commodity, or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere
in the neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off
the days on the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for
invitations.  Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton
post-office was blocked, and the Bywater post-office was snowed under, and
voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a constant stream of
them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, I
shall certainly come.  A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admittance
except on party business. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party
Business were seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations,
ticking off answers, packing up presents, and making some private preparations
of his own. From the time of Gandalf’s arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo’s front
door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special entrance
was cut into the bank leading to the road, and wide steps and a large white
gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, adjoining the
field, were intensely interested and generally envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee
stopped even pretending to work in his garden.  The tents began to go up. There
was a specially large pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the field was
right inside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of the chief
table. Lanterns were hung on all its branches. More promising still (to the
hobbits’ mind): an enormous open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of
the field. A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for miles
around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that were
quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to its height.  Then the weather clouded
over. That was on Wednesday the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then
Thursday, September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the clouds
vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun began.  Bilbo Baggins called it a
party, but it was really a variety of entertainments rolled into one.
Practically everybody living near was invited. A very few were overlooked by
accident, but as they turned up all the same, that did not matter. Many people
from other parts of the Shire were also asked; and there were even a few from
outside the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate
in person. He gave away presents to all and sundry - the latter were those who
went out again by a back way and came in again by the gate. Hobbits give
presents to other people on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a
rule, and not so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system.
Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year it was somebody’s
birthday, so that every hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one
present at least once a week. But they never got tired of them.  On this
occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-children were so excited
that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There were toys the like of
which they had never seen before, all beautiful and some obviously magical.
Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, and had come all the way
from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.  When every guest
had been welcomed and was finally inside the gate, there were songs, dances,
music, games, and, of course, food and drink. There were three official meals:
lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and tea were marked chiefly by
the fact that at those times all the guests were sitting down and eating
together. At other times there were merely lots of people eating and drinking -
continuously from elevenses until six-thirty, when the fireworks started.  The
fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by him, but designed and
made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights of rockets were
let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution of squibs, crackers,
backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, elf-fountains, goblin-barkers
and thunder-claps. They were all superb. The art of Gandalf improved with age.
There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing with sweet
voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves opened
like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches dropped
glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with a sweet
scent just before they touched their upturned faces.  There were fountains of
butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there were pillars of coloured
fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of
flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; there
was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a yell
like an embattled army, and came down again into the Water with a hiss like a
hundred hot snakes. And there was also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo,
and it startled the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights went
out. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the
distance, and began to glow at the summit. It spouted green and scarlet flames.
Out flew a red-golden dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came
from his jaws, his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed three
times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and many fell flat on their
faces. The dragon passed like an express train, turned a somersault, and burst
over Bywater with a deafening explosion.  ‘That is the signal for supper!’ said
Bilbo.  The pain and alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped
to their feet.  There was a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that
is, except those invited to the special family dinner-party. This was held in
the great pavilion with the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen
(a number also called by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was not
considered proper to use of people); and the guests were selected from all the
families to which Bilbo and Frodo were related, with the addition of a few
special unrelated friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included,
and present by parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their
children in the matter of sitting up late, especially when there was a chance
of getting them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks and Brandybucks;
there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins’ grandmother), and
various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a selection of
Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies, Hornblowers and
Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly connected with Bilbo, and
some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote
corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten. Otho and his
wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and detested Frodo, but so
magnificent was the invitation card, written in golden ink, that they had felt
it was impossible to refuse.  Besides, their cousin, Bilbo, had been
specializing in food for many years and his table had a high reputation.  All
the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast; though they
rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their host (an inevitable item). He
was liable to drag in bits of what he called poetry; and sometimes, after a
glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures of his mysterious journey.
The guests were not disappointed: they had a very pleasant feast, in fact an
engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase
of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout the district in the ensuing
weeks; but as Bilbo’s catering had depleted the stocks of most stores, cellars
and warehouses for miles around, that did not matter much.  After the feast
(more or less) came the Speech. Most of the company were, however, now in a
tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they called ‘filling up the
corners’. They were sipping their favourite drinks, and nibbling at their
favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. They were prepared to
listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.  
//This is the end of the file
